README.md, before:

📘 Retail Sales Forecasting & Causal Analysis

This repository contains a machine learning-oriented analysis of retail sales, with a focus on understanding the impact of promotional pricing on sales using real data and ML techniques.

🚀 Project Summary

This project implements a data science solution to forecast retail sales and estimate the causal effect of promotional pricing on sales performance. Using time-series based feature engineering and multiple machine learning models, it delivers insights into how promotions influence demand.

📂 What’s in This Repository
File	Description
Promotional Pricing on Retail Sales.py	Main Python script that runs the analysis and modeling pipeline
Figure_1.png	Visualization output used in the analysis
Screenshot 1.png	Example result or insight from model performance
Screenshot 2.png	Additional visual snapshot showing model outputs
🧠 What This Project Does

This project covers:

📈 Sales Forecasting
Predicts daily/weekly sales using machine learning models.

🧪 Feature Engineering
Time-series features such as lags, rolling statistics, and trend indicators.

🤖 Modeling with ML Algorithms
Implementation of multiple ML models (e.g., XGBoost, Random Forest, Gradient Boosting, and ensemble methods) for accurate sales prediction.

📊 Evaluation & Interpretation
Analysis of performance using metrics such as RMSE, visual diagnostics, and feature importance.

💡 Business Context
Insights on how promotions and pricing changes impact future revenue.

📌 Highlights

Achieved high forecasting accuracy using a combination of advanced models.

Leveraged time-series features such as lagged sales and rolling statistics.

Analysis demonstrates how promotions influence sales trends.

Visual outputs are included as part of the reporting approach.

📥 How to Run the Analysis

Clone the repository:

git clone https://github.com/mallika0731-design/retail-sales-forecasting-ml.git
cd retail-sales-forecasting-ml


Install dependencies (example):

pip install pandas numpy scikit-learn xgboost matplotlib seaborn


Run the main script:

python "Promotional Pricing on Retail Sales.py"

📈 Visual Results

Visual outputs such as Figure_1.png, Screenshot 1.png, and Screenshot 2.png are included to illustrate:

Model performance trends

Forecast vs actual sales comparisons

Interpretations of feature impact

These can be referenced directly as part of project documentation.

👩‍💼 Skills Demonstrated

This project showcases expertise in:

Data preprocessing and time-series feature engineering

Machine learning model development and evaluation

Interpreting and visualizing model output

Writing modular Python scripts suitable for analysis workflows

📊 Executive Business Impact

This project bridges predictive analytics and strategic retail decision-making. By leveraging machine learning models to forecast sales and analyze promotional pricing behavior, it provides actionable insights into how pricing strategies influence demand patterns.

The analytical framework enables retailers to:

Move from reactive to proactive pricing decisions

Estimate the potential return on promotional campaigns

Reduce uncertainty in revenue forecasting

Improve operational planning through accurate demand projections

This solution illustrates how advanced analytics can transition from model experimentation to real-world commercial application, positioning machine learning as a driver of measurable business value rather than purely predictive performance.

Commit message:

Revise README for clarity on business impact and strategy
Updated the README to clarify the project's focus on business impact and strategic value in retail decision-making. Enhanced descriptions of analytical benefits and operational applications of machine learning in pricing strategies.

README.md, after:

📘 Retail Sales Forecasting & Causal Analysis

This repository contains a machine learning-oriented analysis of retail sales, with a focus on understanding the impact of promotional pricing on sales using real data and ML techniques.

🚀 Project Summary

This project implements a data science solution to forecast retail sales and estimate the causal effect of promotional pricing on sales performance. Using time-series based feature engineering and multiple machine learning models, it delivers insights into how promotions influence demand.

📂 What’s in This Repository
File	Description
Promotional Pricing on Retail Sales.py	Main Python script that runs the analysis and modeling pipeline
Figure_1.png	Visualization output used in the analysis
Screenshot 1.png	Example result or insight from model performance
Screenshot 2.png	Additional visual snapshot showing model outputs
🧠 What This Project Does

This project covers:

📈 Sales Forecasting
Predicts daily/weekly sales using machine learning models.

🧪 Feature Engineering
Time-series features such as lags, rolling statistics, and trend indicators.

🤖 Modeling with ML Algorithms
Implementation of multiple ML models (e.g., XGBoost, Random Forest, Gradient Boosting, and ensemble methods) for accurate sales prediction.

📊 Evaluation & Interpretation
Analysis of performance using metrics such as RMSE, visual diagnostics, and feature importance.

💡 Business Context
Insights on how promotions and pricing changes impact future revenue.

📌 Highlights

Achieved high forecasting accuracy using a combination of advanced models.

Leveraged time-series features such as lagged sales and rolling statistics.

Analysis demonstrates how promotions influence sales trends.

Visual outputs are included as part of the reporting approach.

📥 How to Run the Analysis

Clone the repository:

git clone https://github.com/mallika0731-design/retail-sales-forecasting-ml.git
cd retail-sales-forecasting-ml


Install dependencies (example):

pip install pandas numpy scikit-learn xgboost matplotlib seaborn


Run the main script:

python "Promotional Pricing on Retail Sales.py"

📈 Visual Results

Visual outputs such as Figure_1.png, Screenshot 1.png, and Screenshot 2.png are included to illustrate:

Model performance trends

Forecast vs actual sales comparisons

Interpretations of feature impact

These can be referenced directly as part of project documentation.

👩‍💼 Skills Demonstrated

This project showcases expertise in:

Data preprocessing and time-series feature engineering

Machine learning model development and evaluation

Interpreting and visualizing model output

Writing modular Python scripts suitable for analysis workflows

📊 Business Impact & Strategic Value

This project moves beyond pure sales prediction to demonstrate how machine learning can inform real pricing strategy decisions in retail environments.

By modeling historical sales alongside promotional activity, the analysis:

Identifies the incremental sales lift associated with promotional pricing

Quantifies revenue sensitivity to discounts

Distinguishes organic demand growth from promotion-driven demand

Highlights store-level variation in promotional effectiveness

From a strategic perspective, the framework enables:

Targeted promotions instead of blanket discounting

Revenue optimization through data-driven pricing policies

Improved demand forecasting for inventory and workforce planning

Reduced margin erosion from ineffective promotions

This project demonstrates how machine learning can be operationalized into a structured decision-support system that aligns analytics with measurable business outcomes.
